# Rewriting

The main activity of VerCors is rewriting a program. We use the concept of a `Rewriter` to structure the transformation of a program tree in an understandable and disciplined manner.

A rewriter recurses into one tree, and calls [dispatch](./rw-dispatch.md) for each element of the tree by default. To ensure that each part of the tree is actually rewritten, we use the concept of [generations](./rw-generation.md) to make the prior tree and the new tree have unrelated types. Declarations are a bit special: each declaration need not be [succeeded](./rw-succession.md) by exactly one declaration of the same kind — as opposed to structural nodes. By transforming a program tree the verification failures that may occur in the program change, so we explain how to transform the errors to be about the input by providing [blames](./rw-blame.md).

The later sections describe concepts that are more advanced, and require careful consideration to whether they are appropriate. [Nested rewriters](./rw-nested.md) can be used when the rewriting behaviour materially changes when recursing into a certain node. It can be confusing to read, because you might intuit that the patterns in the parent rewriter are still used, when they are not. [Substitution](./rw-substitution.md) can be helpful if your rewriting process is effectively two-step, but it is more straightforward to glue on a simple behavior to one rewriter. Nevertheless it is often actually better to consider explicitly how you might model the substitution statefully anyway: this gives a clearer picture what should happen when e.g. nodes needing subtitution are nested.